JUDY WOODRUFF: Now, another
look at the major news of this
week, both foreign and domestic,
from today's pivotal meeting
between two presidents,
to new developments
with the Senate GOP's
health care plan.
Here to provide analysis
of all that and more
is Brooks and Marcus.
That's New York Times columnist
David Brooks and Ruth Marcus,
deputy editorial page editor
for The Washington Post.
Mark Shields is away this week.
Welcome to you on both.
So, the lead story today,
of course, President Trump
meets President Putin.
David, all eyes on this
meeting, the body language,
what did they say.
And then we have these
conflicting reports
coming out afterwards.
What do we make of it?
DAVID BROOKS: Well, it
was sort of normal for a
Trump administration event.
He did raise the meddling
issue, which is a good thing.
And so it seemed a little
like, from the talking
points, they hit Syria,
they hit all the prints
a U.S. president would talk
to with a Russian president.
It seemed a bit like a normal
meeting, which is a good thing.
The abnormal part to me is how
small it was, that there are
only four people and then the
two translators in the room,
no H.R. McMaster, no national
security adviser, which is an
oddity.
And that gives them maximum
flexibility to say whatever
they want in the room and not
have it reported
out of the room.
And that's what makes the point
about what they were saying
about the meddling or anything
else totally mysterious.
Apparently, there were no
note-takers in the room.
And so it leaves a big
void in what they actually
said and whether Trump
really accepted the
fact that Putin claims
he didn't meddle.
And so it's just a big void
that wouldn't exist if you
had the normal complement of
people in the room and the
normal note-takers in the room,
and you had some actual look
into what sort of what
was happening in there.
JUDY WOODRUFF: A long meeting,
Ruth, but a lot of questions.
RUTH MARCUS: Long meeting,
a lot of questions.
And normal is not the
way I would describe it.
And I think I should start by
the way President Trump started
with Vladimir Putin, which is,
it's an honor to be
here with both of you.
That is a true honor.
I thought for President Trump
to say -- and I understand we
have diplomatic niceties -- it
wasn't an honor to be with
someone who has attacked and
jailed dissidents and killed
dissidents in his country, who
has invaded other countries,
and who has tried to interfere
in an American election.
And I think that simply to
accept that, oh, it's great,
at least he raised the question
of Russian interference, but
we don't know - - and never
will probably -- precisely what
he said, is really defining
the presidency down.
That should have been a given
that he was going to raise that.
And that it wasn't a given,
they left but on tenterhooks,
and that the day before, he
was still saying, well, nobody
really knows for sure what
happened, and seemed more eager
to blame President Obama
for not doing enough,
to question whether the
intelligence community
gets it right, to tweet
today about John Podesta,
Hillary Clinton's campaign
chairman, and say,
why didn't he turn over
the server, just really
underscores to me the
abnormality of the situation.
DAVID BROOKS: I have
successfully defined
deviancy so far down...
(LAUGHTER)
(CROSSTALK)
RUTH MARCUS: Well, that's the
point of normalizing, right?
DAVID BROOKS: Yes.
Well, that's fair.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But,
David, was using the
term honor going too far?
DAVID BROOKS: I think no
normal person would say that.
(LAUGHTER)
DAVID BROOKS: But, on the
other hand, I'm willing to give
diplomatic latitude to that.
There are a lot of people in a
lot of diplomatic circumstances.
And I'm sure, if we went
back and looked at how other
presidents speak, you're trying
to establish a relationship
with a bad guy.
Now, and you say things.
And so I give
latitude toward that.
The question is whether
Donald Trump recognizes that
Vladimir Putin is a bad guy.
That's the larger question
here than whether he
used the word honor.
And I guess there's no
indication that he regards
Putin as in any way a bad guy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Does it matter,
Ruth, whether the president
accepted Putin's denials?
Or are we just -- we're
going to be left wondering
about this forever.
RUTH MARCUS: Well, Secretary
of State Tillerson said that
they basically agreed it didn't
make sense to relitigate
this, actually one
of my favorite words.
And maybe that's true.
The important point is that,
since before the election,
Donald Trump has been denying
that this happened.
He has seemed entirely
unconcerned with figuring
out whether it happened
and with expressing
the outrage that any
American president should be
expressing that it did happen.
And now I think we're supposed
to be satisfied that there is
this joint working group on
cyber-security.
So, I have a modest proposal.
(LAUGHTER)
RUTH MARCUS: If we're going to
have a joint working group on
cyber-security, let's combine
that with the election fraud
commission, and we can really
get to the bottom of everything.
DAVID BROOKS: Say we
had a normal president.
It's actually an interesting
political problem.
What do you do with Russia?
Do you say, you interfered
with our elections,
you're interfering with
all these elections
across Europe, we're not dealing
with you until you behave by
some standards of normalcy?
And that's a morally
satisfying position that, as
a columnist, would be fun.
But there are actually a
lot of issues you have got
to deal with Russia on.
And so this is perpetually the
problem with rogue regimes.
You have got to -- you
deal with them and then
you don't deal with them.
And even if we had a
normal administration,
it would be tough to know
how to treat Vladimir
Putin.
RUTH MARCUS: And this is
my time to now say that
David has a fair point.
And so, sure, whenever you're
dealing with somebody who is
an adversary -- and Russia
is an adversary -- you are
going to have to calibrate,
because there are things that we
need their help on.
We need their help on Syria.
We need their help
on North Korea.
And so you don't want to let one
little attack on your democracy
and your election system
blow everything up.
(LAUGHTER)
RUTH MARCUS: But you do need to
assert yourself in a way that
we haven't seen him do publicly
and that we're going to
still have questions about
whether he did privately.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, speaking
of our democracy, yesterday,
in Poland, David, the president
made a speech to
the Polish people.
And he talked about Western
civilization and how it's under
siege, and how it's going to
matter right now whether
we have the will to survive
the siege that we are under.
Does this ring true?
Does it feel like
Western civilization is
under siege right now?
DAVID BROOKS: Well, I think --
I 80 percent liked the speech.
There was this famous clash
of civilization thesis from
Samuel Huntington, a political
theorist.
And the idea was that Western
civilization is at war with
Islam and maybe some of the
other civilizations
around the world.
And I don't agree with that.
But I do think there is such a
thing as Western civilization.
I think it starts with
the Greeks and the Romans.
Then it goes through the
Enlightenment -- or the
Reformation, the Enlightenment.
It goes through
the scientific age.
And it somewhat defines some
of the cultures and mores of
Europe and North America and
some other countries.
And it's obviously absorbed
a lot of immigrants and
it's absorbed a lot of
ideas and had exchange
with Asia and other
civilizations.
But it's a thing.
And I like the fact that
he appealed to that,
especially when he's
trying to, I hope, reunify
the Western alliance, which
has been a powerful force for
good in the world over the last
70 years.
And, to his credit, he
appealed to some of the
things that are finest
about Western civilization,
artistic creativity, rights of
minorities, equality for woman.
He ran down the list.
Whether the guy actually lives
by those standards is another
matter, but at least he appealed
to them.
And I think it's a big mistake
any time anybody makes an appeal
to the West or to America,
to patriotism to think,
oh, he's excluding.
It's an identity formation.
And we need our
identity formations.
And I think he did
it, in the speech at
least, reasonably well.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How
do you read that?
RUTH MARCUS: Well,
I'm not at 80 percent.
Surprise.
But there are things to
like about the speech.
One thing to like about the
speech is that, unlike the
last time he was in Europe, he
was -- and cut the words out
of the speech, we learned
later, he was able to at least
read from the teleprompter
that he supports Article 5, the
fundamental provision of NATO
for common self-defense.
On the other hand, last time,
when he was in Saudi Arabia,
he was able to not say the
words radical Islamic terrorism.
I will give you Article
5, but I need my radical
Islamic terrorism.
I think it was very nice
to hear the summoning
of the importance of
a free press and all
those things.
A little hard to take from
somebody who had just tweeted
out that CNN beat-up wrestling
video.
And so that brings me to
my fundamental concern,
which is, which are we
paying attention to,
teleprompter Trump or
off-the-cuff tweeter Trump?
Both matter, right, his
willingness to say things.
I was a little more put off
by the Western part of the
invocation of common values and
democratic values that
we should all live by.
But teleprompter
Trump is one thing.
But I think, when we see
the real Trump, it's a
lot more nervous-making,
to say the least.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Do we know
which one is the real Trump?
DAVID BROOKS: No.
I take Ruth's point.
But you remember Angela Merkel
had given this - - made this
comment about Europe has to go
it alone, because we
don't about this guy.
And so this appeal to a
Western cohesion to me
was a valuable thing.
The second thing is -- and
this is something Trump does
better than a lot of his critics
- - he understands
sense of belonging.
And a lot of people think
globalization, any time you make
any particularity, you're sort
of offending some other group.
And a lot of people in this
country think they belong to
America anymore, and he at
least appeals to some
sense of belonging.
I like the idea that we belong
to Western traditions, so
I'm glad he appeals to that
sort of thing.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All right.
We're going to -- we could talk
about this for a long time.
But I do want to bring us back
to something that we heard
Lisa Desjardins reporting on,
Ruth, and that is the
health care, Republican
health care plan.
She -- by her reporting, it
sounds like that Republicans
are having a tougher time than
ever now getting the votes they
need to get something through.
RUTH MARCUS: Well, Senate
Majority Mitch McConnell
has been talking about
this as a Rubik's Cube.
But with the Rubik's Cube,
you know there's a solution.
(LAUGHTER)
RUTH MARCUS: With this
one, not so clear.
And what I loved this week was
that McConnell, who is I think
absolutely dedicated to trying
to find the votes, and --
which wasn't totally clear.
Maybe he just wanted to get
this put aside, so we can move
on to tax cuts, which they
really care about.
And no one discounts
his ability.
If anybody could do it, he can.
But he brought out the
big guns this week,
threatening the ultimate
sanction, bipartisanship.
(LAUGHTER)
RUTH MARCUS: If you guys don't
go along, I'm going to have
to work with Democrats, and
then you will see how unhappy
you will be with the result.
DAVID BROOKS: Yes.
What's the opposite
of a nuclear option?
(LAUGHTER)
RUTH MARCUS: It's
the talking option.
DAVID BROOKS: Like, we will
do something good, right?
We will do something good.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Oh, my God,
we may have to work together.
What does it look like?
DAVID BROOKS: I agree
with Ruth on this.
It looks dead.
It just like -- not only have
you begun to see the burbling
concerns, and then out in
some of the few town halls
that have been out there,
you have seen those concerns.
But you're beginning to see all
these members come freelancing
off in different elections.
Ted Cruz is freelancing
from that direction.
Mike Lee is staking out a
position that will be completely
unacceptable to a lot of people.
And then the moderates are
staking out their position.
So, not only is it hard to
piece together this together.
They're all going further apart.
And so they're all
defending themselves.
And it's just -- the party
is not cohesive enough, so
I think there's no solution.
It's super hard to take away a
benefit that is pretty deeply
embedded now, no matter what
your ideology is.
And to me -- and it's a genuine
question -- what do we do?
McConnell made the correct
point that you can't just do
nothing, because the markets,
the insurance markets
are struggling.
And so something has to be
done, some normal repair
at least has to be done.
How do we do that?
Can we really imagine
a bipartisan solution?
Frankly, I cannot.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And the
conservatives can't imagine it
would go along with shoring up
the current system.
RUTH MARCUS: Well, it's going
to take a long time to get
to a bipartisan solution.
And I want to kind of lay out
the possibility that there are
ways in which you could cobble
this together.
You say, OK, some of
these tax cuts for the
rich don't have to go.
There's all sorts
of other things.
But that's going
to have to fail.
There are people working,
Lamar Alexander, Susan Collins.
Democrats are working with them
on this that - - and there are
ways to shore up the markets.
We have had a learning curve on
the Affordable Care Act, which
kind of suggests two things.
People like it, and it needs
some tinkering that are most
-- that's mostly around the
edges.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, we want
to leave this on a positive
note, so we're going to stop
right there.
And by next Friday,
we will know more.
Ruth Marcus, David
Brooks, thank you both.
RUTH MARCUS: Thanks.
DAVID BROOKS: Thank you.